okay so now let's look at some of the
basic techniques for machine translation
so one of the fundamental ideas behind
modern translation systems is that
translation is actually just a method of
decoding so here's a famous quote I were
to read it aloud one naturally wonders
if the polymer of translation could
conceivably be treated as a poem in
cryptography when I look at an article
in a fashion I say this is renovated in
English but it has been coded in some
strange symbols I will now proceed to
decode so this is a quote from Warren
Weaver one of the founders of
information theory in the book called
translation published in 1955 almost 60
years ago so here's a question for the
audience if you know some French at
least look at the next two slides which
have been translated automatically from
Google Translate and see if you can
figure out whether the system did a good
job and what sort of mistakes it made so
the documents are about a recipe in
English so look at the next two slides
and pause as much as you need and go
back and forth between them to figure
out if you can and identify the
translation issues
so he's dogged you know recipe
ingredients and then directions so I
just read one sentence he cooked pasta
in a large pot of boiling salted water
until al dente and here's the automatic
translation from Google or in French
clearly pat-downs in con castle dog
William Sally discussed case for Al dent
so let's spend a little bit of time and
see what's wrong in those translations
and also what works I'm going to show
you some examples on the next slide so
here's the answer so I went back for
seconds if you can see the last
ingredient here for some reason has the
pound sign which is probably just the
way that Google translated one pound
which is really funny and incorrect
let's look at some of the other four
here so I'll show you three of those the
first one is just not syntactically
correct justice could press key Billie
Jean it means something like near our
boiling point but it's grammatically
incorrect then the next problem is the
use of a sequence of verbs which form a
very nice parallel structure in English
so in specifically its cook reduce
simmer stir stir drain service or in
English all those verbs appear as in
imperative sentences whereas in French
the translation is somehow mixed it has
the first one here is an infinitive then
a red year as infinitive and one more
infinitive and then it switches to a
noun and then another infinitive and so
on and then the last example that I want
to show you is some problem with
agreement so Corvette with plural and
then it is listed as transparent which
is singular it should have had an extra
S at the end to indicate that it's
plural so in French the problem is that
adjectives and nouns have to agree with
each other in number and gender in some
cases so in this example we have
disagreement so let's see what causes
machine translation systems to have
phonons when they translate from one
language to another so there are many
reasons the first one is word order so
some language is a subject verb object
for example English and Mandarin others
are verb subject object and others a
subject object verb so obviously in
sentences like this when we have
languages from different word order
categories we have to use some syntactic
information to figure out where to move
the subject and the verb and the object
so it is another example with
prepositions in Japanese so in Japanese
the prepositions are actually post
positions they are put after the words
if you want to say something like - ma
Rico in Japanese you would say this
maricon me another example is in flexion
with an example in Spanish in Spanish
the would have can be translated in many
different ways
on the person and number of the verb and
also whether its infinitive or not so
tengo for example is first person
singular tienes is second person
singular tenemos is first person plural
tiene and his third person plural and
tener is the infinitive all those appear
in English ins have so if you want to
produce a system that translates some
English to Spanish we have to figure out
what is the subject of half before we
can figure out the correct verb for some
more examples lexical distinctions again
with an example in Spanish so here we
are making a distinction between the
word use in the two languages so in
English we say the bottle floated out
whereas in English in Spanish the true
correct translation will be la botella
sali float on de which means it left
the place by floating or while floating
another example in Japanese is word that
has multiple translations is word
brother so brother in Japanese can be
either Oh Toto which is a younger
brother or oniisan which is an older
brother one more example of French the
word
de in English can be translated as
either L or L depending on whether the
group is feminine or masculine so some
more examples on the next slide so word
order in phrases so for example in
French the adjective typically follows
the noun they say la maison bleue the
blue house where the noun is before the
verb in French and certain noun is
before the adjective in French another
example is the much more complicated
word order in Japanese so have because
of the subject verb object versus
subject-object-verb order so if we want
to translate I like to drink coffee from
English to Japanese we have the word
order in English as pronoun subject
followed by verb followed by some phrase
that involves a verb and a noun in
Japanese you would have to translate
this as something like this watashi wa
koko no moon or gas Kiedis which means
that watashi is i so that stays in the
right place why is the subject marker
which was not in English
Kohi or is the direct object for coffee
and the object here appears before the
verb normal no is the expression for to
drink so it's some nominalization of the
verb to drink
da is a marker of the topic and then
suki desu is like which because it's the
verb of the sentence it appears all the
way to the end so as you can imagine
translating from English to Japanese is
much more difficult and let's say
translating from English to a more
similar language such as French so
they're not example here is vocabulary
in Spanish so in English the word walk
can have multiple meanings whether it's
an internal wall or an external wall so
the words in Spanish for this are per
head and more so obviously you need to
understand the context of the document
to come up with the correct translation
of wall in my final example is again in
French so we can have entire phrases
that can be substituted for single words
so the word play in English as a noun
indicating drama or comedy in theatres
so play is translated in French as PS
the chat or you can probably yes
something like a piece of theatre but
what's more important is that we can
have many cases where one word in one
language gets translated as multiple
words in another language or vice-versa
or maybe even multi word expressions can
be translated as multi word expressions
but with a very different internal
structure okay now that we understand
why machine translation can be difficult
let's figure out how we can build
working machine translation systems
there are many approaches and many of
them are based on this triangle here F
here stands for French he stands for
English but in many instances we can
just use F to indicate any foreign
language that is being translated into
English i stands for inter lingua in the
linguist some sort of semantic
representation of the text that is not
dependent on the underlying language and
let's look at the different strategies
the first one that we're going to
discuss is the so-called direct approach
the direct approach just says start
from the beginning of the foreign
sentence and then look it up in the
dictionary and one word at a time and
then translate into English so obviously
this doesn't take into account any of
the polish that we discussed so far so
you can have ambiguous words you don't
know which translation to pick you can
have syntactic disagreements and so on
so the support was tried in the 50s and
60s before there were any powerful
computers and any language resources
such as software or like parallel data
or dictionaries it's obviously a very
naive approach that has no way to work
and I'm going to now show two funny
examples from that time period that show
how bad it was then the first example
people were trying to build a system
that translates from English to Russian
and then to figure out if they did a
good job they do manually try to
translate back from Russian into English
to see if they get the same thing so the
sentence that they tried to give was the
flesh is weak but the spirit is strong
so when the sentence got translated into
Russian and back into English people
were scared to see that the translation
went like this the meat is rotten but
the vodka is very good so as you can see
that this is a very bad translation but
you can see why the system would make
such a mistake and the other funny
example from that time is to translate
this expression out of sight out of mind
so it went to ration and back and then
it came back as a blind idiot so you can
see how bad it was another portrait was
developed later in so-called indirect
transfer method so in the transfer
method you have some set of grammatical
rules that apply to different pairs of
languages so for example in French the
adjective follows the noun in English
the NAM follows the adjective so you can
have rules like this and then once you
identify the adjectives and the
knowledge you can at least translate
them in the right order the third
approach is to use an encoding terlingua
so inter linguist when you translate
let's say the foreign language into some
logical form for example in the first
order logic or model logic and then you
use some generation to translate back
from that into lingual representation to
your target language so here's some
examples if you want to translate this
is a blue house with the director pour -
a translate each word separately with
transfer we would make sure it needs to
get blue and house in the right order
and within terlingua we would have some
sort of logical representation H is a
house and H is blue and then use
generation to produce the English
version so in the next segment we're
going to look at noisy shadow methods
for machine translation which form the
basis of modern translation technology